Add `readonly` examples and documentation (#189)
eclipsesource/jsonforms2-website: content/examples/readonly.mdx

---
id: readonly
title: ReadOnly
---

import { ReadOnlyConfig, ReadOnlyUiSchema, ReadOnlySchema, ReadOnlyRule } from '../../src/components/examples/ReadOnly'

## Form Wide

There are multiple ways to use the `readonly` option.

> One is to define `readonly` on the JsonForms object itself. This will disable *all* inputs of this form.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
import { ReadOnlyConfig, ReadOnlyUiSchema, ReadOnlySchema, ReadOnlyRule } from '../../src/components/examples/ReadOnly'

JSON Forms allows to enable and disable any input, either programmatically, via JSON Schema or the UI schema.

## Form Wide

The whole form can be disabled by specifying the `readonly` flag on the `JsonForms` component itself.
This will disable *all* elements of this form.
```

```js
<JsonForms
  renderers={materialRenderers}
  cells={materialCells}
  data={data}
  schema={schema}

>   uischema={uischema}pp

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  uischema={uischema}
```

  readonly
/>
```

> Although the example above shows a react example, this flag also exists for angular and vue.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This flag is also supported by the Angular and Vue bindings.
```

<ReadOnlyConfig />

> ## Input based

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## Schema based
```

> ### UI Schema

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### UI Schema option
```

> If you want to set the `readonly` option on a per-input basis, you can do so by setting `readonly: true` on the element options within the UI schema:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The option `readonly: true` can be set on any element in the UI schema:
```

```js
{
  type: "VerticalLayout",
  elements: [
    {
      type: "Control",
      label: "Completed",
      scope: "#/properties/firstname",
      options: {
        readonly: true
      }
    }
  ]
}
```

<ReadOnlyUiSchema />

> ### Schema

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### JSON Schema
```

> An alternative to set the `readOnly` option via the UI Schema, is to set this option via the schema:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To disable an input via JSON Schema, specify `readOnly: true`:
```

```js
{
  properties: {
    firstname: {
      type: "string",
      readOnly: true
    },
  }
}
```

> Note: `readonly` will be ignore within the schema, only `readOnly` is a [valid option](https://json-schema.org/draft/2020-12/json-schema-validation.html#rfc.section.9.4).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Note: JSON Forms will ignore `readonly` within JSON Schemas [as only `readOnly` is part of the specification](https://json-schema.org/draft/2020-12/json-schema-validation.html#rfc.section.9.4).
```

<ReadOnlySchema />

### Rule

The last option to disable an input is to set a `DISABLE` (or `ENABLED` with a false condition) rule on it.

> Read more about [rules](/docs/uischema/rules).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Any UI schema element can be enabled or disabled dynamically via our [rule support](/docs/uischema/rules).
```

```js
{
  type: "VerticalLayout",
  elements: [
    {
      type: "Control",
      label: "Completed",
      scope: "#/properties/firstname",
      rule: {
        effect: "DISABLE",
        condition: {

>           scope: "#/properties/name",

Reviewer: The `properties/name` scope does not even exist for this JSON Schema which can be misleading ;)
```suggestion
          scope: "#",
```

          schema: {} //always true
        }
      }
    },
    // OR
    {
      type: "Control",
      label: "Completed",
      scope: "#/properties/firstname",
      rule: {
        effect: "ENABLE",
        condition: {

>           scope: "#/properties/name",

Reviewer: ```suggestion
          scope: "#",
```

          schema: { not: {} } //always false
        }
      }
    }
  ]
}
```

> <ReadOnlyRule />

Reviewer: ```suggestion
<ReadOnlyRule />

## Evaluation order

JSON Forms determines the `enabled` status for each UI schema element based on the following order

1. When the form wide `readonly` is specified, all inputs will be disabled.
2. If an `ENABLE` or `DISABLE` rule exists, the UI schema element will be rendered accordingly.
3. If the UI schema `readonly` option is set, the UI schema element will be rendered accordingly.
4. If the JSON Schema `readOnly: true` attribute is specified, the UI schema element will be disabled.
5. If none of the above apply, the UI schema element will be enabled or disabled based on its parent.

```
